# Independent Webster

The web is a cool place. We have many platforms, social networks, never-ending
content, and lots of interesting people creating independent websites; and most
of it was built on technology intended to be decentralized and democratic, which
greatly contributed to a diversity of participating parties.

Alas, after a few decades observing this ecosystem evolve comes the realization
of current limitations and wasted potential: [silos][] thriving while open
platforms struggle to self sustain; network effects and cutthroat competition
leading to consolidation; anti-competitive conglomerates welcoming more user
content but preventing those outside the walled garden from accessing it.

[silos]: https://indieweb.org/silo

The inevitably political fight for a better Internet is vital and I'm hopeful we
as a society can and will do better, but it takes time. Fortunately there's no
need to wait. The independent web, IndieWeb for short, is a grassroots movement
to nudge the web back into a more decentralized but interconnected place.

After the continued enshitification of platforms and deeply concerning trends in
moderation or lack thereof, the time is ripe for making my website my online
home and slowly divest from these problematic behemoths.

Read more at [indieweb.org/why](https://indieweb.org/why).

## Owning a Domain Name

Having an personal Internet Domain Name is the first step towards taking
ownership of one's online identity and taking control over an own corner of the
Web. Because the domain serves as bedrock to that identity, it should be chosen
carefully and considered permanent as much as possible. A domain costs money,
but a cheap one costs less than a telephone landline.

There are a few tools like [CunningBot][] that can help choosing a domain name
and others like [Instant Domain Search][] and [Website Planet][] that can
quickly search under which [Top Level Domain][]s a name is available. There are
also tools like [Namechk][] that probe if common platforms and social networks
will have that name as an available handles, which is nice for consistency.

[CunningBot]: https://cunningbot.com
[Instant Domain Search]: https://instantdomainsearch.com/
[Website Planet]: https://www.websiteplanet.com/webtools/domain-name-generator/
[TLD]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Top-level_domain
[Namechk]: https://namechk.com

I was lucky in that (a part of) my surname is [a real top level domain][tlds] so
I was able to grab myself victor.villas. This domain is quite costly but I just
can't help it, it's too satisfiying to own it.

Read more at [indieweb.org/personal-domain](https://indieweb.org/personal-domain).

[tlds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Internet_top-level_domains

### Bonus: Custom Email Address

If a purchasing a domain name is like buying a virtual plot of land, configuring
an email would be the equivalent of installing a mail box able to receive the
usual proofs of residency.

Most e-mail providers support adding a custom email address to an existing
account, requiring minimal work to start using the new address and keeping all
the old mail. If the current provider doesn't support it, it's likely the Domain
Registrar that sells the domain also offers an inbox or forwarding service.

Having all e-mail coming through an own address allows changing providers in the
future without having to change email address, thus avoiding the hassle of
notifying contacts and updating sign-ups everywhere. Just point the address to a
different mailbox and start receiving new mail there. This freedom reduces
lock-in to specific platforms and is a simple yet effective way to diminish
corporations' hold on your communications.

Self hosting email can be a big headache, so I'm sticking to iCloud for now. As
an Apple One subscriber I get iCloud+ which includes custom domain support. I
could easily move to a more privacy-focused provider but this is not a top
concern for the moment.

## A Personal Website

Owning a domain and being reachable through it (e.g. with a custom email) is the
foundation for an independent presence on the Web, but the biggest potential
lies in using that property to build up a haven for what matters. That's
possible going back to the open technologies behind the success of the Internet:
the web.

Static website hosting is cheap - most often free - and powerful enough for the
vast majority of people. I deploy this site via GitHub Pages because I still
default to GitHub for most of my code, but there are plenty of non-Microsoft
alternatives that are just as easy to set up.

I build my website with NextJS, because I already know the basics of React and
it gets the hassle of setting up Webpack and TypeScript out of my way, but
there's a plethora of non-Meta frameworks that are lean and powerful
alternatives.

Read more at [indieweb.org/homepage](https://indieweb.org/homepage).

### Bonus: a "now" page

While most people think of starting with a an "about" page or section in their
home page to introduce _who they are_, a ["now" page][now] is a more dynamic and
interesting way to present _what they're doing_. It's the most basic form of a
blog or social media presence, allowing anyone to quickly catch up.

It might be even more effective in its purpose than social media or a blog if it
focuses on the big picture - "think of what you'd tell a friend you hadn't seen
in a year". It's much more useful to get a direct summary than having to piece
together a narrative from disconnected posts in multiple platforms.

[now]: https://nownownow.com/about

I considered having my "now" content right in the home page because I don't
expect people to come in all too often, but I decided to keep it separate so it
has its own descriptive URL ([/notes/now](/notes/now)) and I don't tire myself
of reading it - I'm by far the person who will be reading this website the most.

## Federated Platforms (WIP)

## RSS Feeds (WIP)

### Bonus: post embedding (WIP)

## Newsletters (WIP)

### Bonus: translation (WIP)
