# 🛤️ The Pursuit

I've had a lot of luck in my life. I was lucky to have been raised to be
competitive; I was lucky to gravitate towards computing among other engineering
fields right at the time of the software development boom; and I was lucky as a
recent grad to land at a startup that succeeded and made me grow quickly; then I
was lucky to avoid the bubble bursting headwinds and landed a relocation with a
good salary at big tech.

I also had a great deal of luck to be on the last batch of a state-sponsored
exchange program which put me in contact with different ant interesting people;
I was lucky to live inside a progressive bubble that corrected a lot of bad
tendencies previously ingrained; then I became the luckies of all when I was
introduced to a loving partner that is my ever-shining guiding star.

Obviously there was a lot of effort involved, herculean effort and commitment.
Long hours, long long hours burning through life fueled by that spirit of
pursuing success. My brain circuitry aligned my passion with the most rewarding
activities capitalism designed for my generation, but making the most of it was
still a bit brutal in retrospect.

But that too was by chance. I was placed on the empty straight road, with a
perfectly tuned pair of legs, given top performant shoes, and I was raised a
runner. All the privileges possible, short of being born with the trophy already
on the shelf.

## The State of the Art

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hedonic_treadmill


## Moving Forward

Richard Hamming is credited with a three-pronged attack on diligence:

1. What are the most important problems in your field?
2. Are you working on one of them?
3. Why not?”




# Motivation for Duties

As a functioning adult, one has to keep tabs on a very long list of tasks for
the sake of the endless maintenance of health, relationships, the household, and
society at large. It's taxing enough to keep this whole machinery in order for
one's own benefit; harder still is keeping up with the commitments acquired via
"promises and compromises". 

The situation is easy to picture: a person you care about has a need and you're
the most appropriate person to fulfill that long-term, so you agree to own it.
One new responsibility is born and commitment of best effort is made, adding Yet
Another To-Do™ to your ever-growing pile of infinitely recurring tasks.

A case study. I favor the "disgusting but quick" over the "straightforward but
boring" tasks, which is why I've taken bathroom & stove cleaning to escape the
ownership of dusting and mopping. Being the owner of a task that _someone_ has
to do isn't so much of a compromise - that task is inherently essential. On the
contrary. Splitting chores is the privilege of a divided burden, so "scrubbing
the toilet" as a task isn't a compromise; it's my ticket to _less chores
overall_. But the "what" is only half the story, the "when" is just as critical:
if I'm comfortable doing one big deep scrub once every X days and my partner in
chores cannot tolerate a gap that large, I **compromise** and commit to the
frequency reasonably requested. Doing it every Y days instead of X days (X>Y) is
a promised responsibility, for the sake of equity and fairness.

Why is this kind of responsibility so easily left behind? I think it's because
the immediate consequences for the broken promise is upsetting a different
brain. Even if that brain is attached to the love of my life, it is REALLY hard
to make the proper calculation on the importance of that task when you're low in
physical or mental energy, when willpower falters.

It's all too easy to fall into temptation of skipping the gym because
future-myself will be the one upset (and future-myself is a different person!).
Similarly, it's easy to convince my present self that it's alright to clean this
sink _just one day later_, because someone also-not-me _might_ be upset - but oh
surely they'll be understanding of my current conditions, and doing it every X
days is not so bad in the first place! Subconsciously, the compromise
negotiation is re-litigated with a different outcome.

Alas, yes it is that bad. That's why the promise was made in the first place. If
it's time to debate a change to the agreement, it can't be an imaginary
impromptu debate. The compromise exists because it's important, and while my
brain brushes off this slipup as not a big deal, it does know deep down how bad
it is and how you are in fact hurting someone you care about. Candid talks are
made necessary, regret ensues, promises to do better are renewed.

