# Long Grain White Rice

The type of rice depends on the degree of processing of its multiple layers:
brown rice includes the bran, germ, and endosperm - the bran and germ are
nutrient dense, but have tougher texture and a characteristic earthy color;
white rice is generally just the endosperm - the chaff, bran, and germ removed -
pretty much just the starch part of the whole grain.

## Washing the Amylopectin Away

Rice includes two main types of starch: amylose and amylopectin. Both are large
carbohydrate units consisting of glucose molecules. Amylose is a straight chain,
while amylopectin is highly branched. That structural difference leads to
differences in the texture of cooked rice. Amylose is less soluble in water, and
doesn't readily form a gel or produce a thickening effect in hot water; in
contrast, amylopectin is more water soluble, and raises the viscosity of the
surrounding water. Rice grain varieties that are relatively high in amylose tend
to be more separate when cooked, with less sticking between grains, while rice
with a higher relative amylopectin content tends to produce stickier rice with
less separation between grains.

## Doneness: Gelatinization vs Pasting

Rice being mostly starch, is composed of semi crystalline granules. If exposed
to enough heat and moisture, these starch granules swell and soften, loosening
that hard, crystalline structure, a process known as **gelatinization**. When
rice is fully gelatinized, it is soft and palatable; otherwise it feels crunchy
(undercooked).

After gelatinization, continued heating or agitation begins to break down those
swollen starch granules, leaching amylose and increasing the viscosity of the
surrounding liquid. This process known as pasting results in sticky and mushy
rice (overcooked).
