# Reclaiming the Web

https://indieweb.org/why

## Owning a Domain Name

Having an own personal Internet Domain Name is the first step towards building
an identity and setting up one's own corner of the Web. Because the domain
serves as a foundation to an online identity, it should be chosen carefully and
considered permanent as much as possible. A domain costs money, but a cheap one
costs less than a telephone landline.

There are a few tools like [CunningBot][] that can help choosing a domain name
and others like [Instant Domain Search][] that can quickly search under which
TLDs a name is available. There are also tools like [Namechk][] that probe if
common platforms and social networks will have that name as an available
handles, which is nice for consistency.

[CunningBot]: https://cunningbot.com
[Instant Domain Search]: https://instantdomainsearch.com/
[Namechk]: https://namechk.com

## Custom Email Address

If a purchasing a domain name is like buying a virtual lot of land with a proper
address, configuring an email inbox on that address would be the equivalent of
installing a mail box that receives the usual proofs of residency.

Most e-mail providers support adding a custom email address to an existing
account, requiring minimal work to start using the new address and keeping all
the old mail. If the current provider doesn't support it, it's likely the Domain
Registrar that sells the domain will offer an inbox or forwarding service.

Having all your e-mail coming through an address that you own allows you to
change providers without the hassle of notifying all your contacts and updating
all your credentials. You just point your address to a different mailbox and
start receiving new mail there.

## Own Website

Deploying a website into your domain is the foundation for your presence on the
Web. Control over its content is what makes it yours, the content itself is what
makes it represent you.

There are many ways to create and operate a website: from all-inclusive builders
like WordPress, to online hosting a Static Website, to self-hosting a
fully-fledged web server.

A cheap way to operate a website is to use static website hosting, which is
often offered freely by several platforms like GitHub, GitLab, Netlify,
CloudFlare, DigitalOcean and many others. In any case, you're responsible for
configuring the website generation with a static website generator tool and the
website publishing with one of these platforms.

## Web Sign-In

If you already [[Use a Custom Email Address]], a simple method is to use email
authentication supported by [[RelMeAuth]].

[[RelMeAuth]] might support one of the platforms or social networks you have an
account, but consider a bonus independence point not relying on those to
authenticate you anywhere.

Additionally, configuring [[IndieAuth]] with IndieAuth.com for authorization
will allow you to use your email-based [[RelMeAuth]] to sign in to websites that
don't support [[RelMeAuth]] directly but do support the [[IndieAuth]] standard.

Web Sign-In is an authentication method where the identity is based on a web
address. A client that supports Web Sign-In will then inspect the given address
to find an authorization method to use as next step.

One common implementation of Web Sign-In is RelMeAuth, which uses `rel=me` links
to find a service to which authentication can be delegated. Another option is
IndieAuth, where the client negotiates with a specified authorization endpoint.

IndieAuth is a protocol for [[Web Sign-In]]. It's a standard on top of [[OAuth]]
that defines how to obtain an OAuth 2.0 Bearer Token for an End-User represented
solely by an URL.

The protocol inspects your website for metadata that specifies which
authentication endpoint you want to use and then proceeds with the OAuth token
negotiation with that endpoint.

Supporting IndieAuth in a service means letting users bring their own
authentication provider. This provider can be a website like `micro.blog`, your
own OpenID proxy, or another [[Web Sign-In]] enabled provider like
`IndieAuth.com`.

To configure IndieAuth as a user, all you need to do is to inform the
authorization provider endpoint in your website. For example, when using
`IndieAuth.com`:

```
<link rel="authorization_endpoint" href="https://indieauth.com/auth">
```

> Using `rel="authorization_endpoint"` is deprecated on the IndieAuth spec but
> it's what IndieAuth.com supports at the moment.

The latest standard can be found at https://indieauth.spec.indieweb.org.

### RelMeAuth

RelMeAuth is a protocol for Web Sign-In. This protocol inspects your website for
links to other identities of yours that could be used for authentication.

For example, these can be links to your profile on some platform like GitHub or
social media like Twitter. If the service confirms such profile belongs to the
same person that operates this website, the protocol knows that it can use this
service's authentication to confirm your identity.

RelMeAuth also supports different authentication delegates, including Email, SMS
and a Public (PGP) Key challenge.
