# Wake Up At The Same Time Every Day

It's more important to be consistent than to be early. If you want to wake up
earlier than you do nowadays, but you are not currently consistent with your
wake-up times, consistency comes first.

The two main aspects of consistency are: 1) forming a habit; and 2) nurturing a
stable circadian rhythm. The two are linked, and investing in one will help with
the other. For habit formation, we need to train our brains. For sleep health,
we need preventative care for our bodies.

Sleep schedule consistency can be divided into two goals: getting out of bed at
the planned time and being disciplined with bedtime. Making progress on both
simultaneously is the ideal, but the first one is the most important so focus on
that at first. As long as wake-up time is consistent, your body should begin
anticipating and demanding bedtime naturally.

The main goal here is to achieve end-to-end **reliability** of the "waking up"
routine, from alarm to whatever defines the start of your day. In practice,
reliability means 1) to never miss the alarm, 2) to get out of bed immediately,
and 3) to go on and do whatever comes next. Each of these can be a challenge
requiring different solutions.

## Never Miss The Alarm

The good news is that this is easily solved with technology. The simplest method
of not missing an alarm is to have one be astoundingly scandalous, such that it
will wake even the neighbours if you don't silence it immediately. Not a song
- just a loud, irritating machine noise.

If you're not a heavy sleeper, milder alarms should suffice. It's a matter of
trial and error to find the minimally intrusive alarm that is maximally
effective. After the habit starts kicking in and waking up feels natural and
effortless, you can always revisit your choice to tone it down.

Haptic alarms from smartwatches are a good silent option. Using "sunrise" lights
is also a nice trick: increasing the bedroom brightness slowly helps your body
interpret this as dawn. Sunrise alarm clocks should help ward off drowsiness and
might be slightly less disruptive to others when compared to a siren.

The best of both worlds is stacking alarms, so that most days you wake up with a
gentle signal - but in case that one fails, a trusty and punitive alarm will
make you jump out of bed. Ideally, set up the pair in a way such that when you
actually get out of bed with just the first alarm, the second alarm is
automatically disabled. Carrots work better than sticks, but we use both to seal
the deal.

The major risk here is that your brain starts to learn how to perform the
movements required to stop the alarm while half-asleep, so alarms that are too
easy to disable might be disabled by your sleeping self and you might not even
remember doing it. That's why getting out of bed immediately and without fail is
the crucial next step.

## Get Out of Bed Immediately

Getting out of bed is easiest done if integrated with a particular choice of
"backup alarm" - the one that fires if the first one wasn't enough. The strategy
is to set this up so the backup shouldn't be controllable until you're already
up. This can be a bit tricky to configure, but it's doable with clever
automation.

For example, if your primary alarm is a smartwatch, have your smartphone be the
backup and your phone charger away from your bed, maybe not even in the bedroom.
Or if your smartphone is your primary alarm, create an automation so that after
the alarm rings, the phone keeps sending you notifications every minute until it
detects the living room lights are on.

The more complicated you make it to disable the backup alarm, the better
protected you are from sleepwalking back into bed. Even better if that
complication comes from whatever your first morning task is. For example, if
your first order of business is washing your face, your backup alarm could be
disabled by some automation that detects you've turned on the bathroom lights
and they stay on for at least 1 minute but no more than 10 minutes.

Having a consistent first-thing-in-the-morning task that can be "detected" makes
the setup easier, but it's also important to keep that task simple and
rewarding. A warm shower or a refreshing face wash; making coffee or eating some
fruit; something that's a bit like a simple everyday chore but still brings some
concrete satisfaction in finishing it.

## Engage the Morning Routine

A good kind of first-thing-in-the-morning habit is the mechanical kind,
something easily done while half asleep and without thinking. A few classic
possibilities: taking a shower, basic skin care, eating a bowl of cereal.

It's not that doing things without thinking is great for you - it's not, even
mundane tasks are best done with attention - but becoming a reliable drone comes
before becoming a disciplined monk. One small task to kick off the day is enough
to get started, though you can start appending more steps later on.

## What I Do In Practice

I use my iPhone Alarm app, and if I have my Apple Watch on (which I do for sleep
tracking), the phone will stay silent and use just watch haptics as alarm. The
alarm can't be snoozed. Stopping the alarm triggers a Shortcuts automation. This
automation will send a notification every 45 seconds until I connect one of my
audio devices to the phone (like my AirPods). These notifications are a pulse of
haptics on my wrist that doesn't let me just sleep in peace after the alarm goes
off. If I remove the watch, the notifications start to make sounds on the phone.
The only way to fight this system in order to keep sleeping is to get out of bed
and turn off the phone. The phone spends the night in a charging station far
enough from my bed that I never turned it off without being awake enough to
understand what I'm doing.

My system is not absolutely effective. I can get up, turn off the phone, and
decide to go back to bed. The key part is that this is a **decision**, not
something that happens without me having some consciousness of what's happening.
The goal of this setup is to make sure I wake up. Given I did wake up, if I end
up going back to bed that's a separate problem, with a separate solution.

The system is slightly overcomplicated because I like to wake up slighly earlier
than my partner, so I prefer using haptics to not be too disruptive with her
sleep. Without that concern, this is not too diferent from just having an alarm
that requires you to walk out of your room to disable it.
