# What's Up

_Updated 2025-02-16_

## Life

Vancouver is cold. Most days feel below freezing, and snow is still around, so I
have been riding my bike less and using public transit more. Either method takes
me on average less than 15 minutes to get to work, making my mandated Return To
Office 5 days a week much more bearable than it would be otherwise, so I'm
grateful for this fortune and privilege.

Riding my bike hasn't been bad, actually. I did it on the day that had peak snow
conditions and had a blast even though the bike paths had not been cleared
completely yet. It was one of the most beautiful sights I've ever seen, [riding
along a fresh-powdered and deserted seawall][snow-cycling]. The biggest negative
of cycling right now is my lack of preparation: I need mittens. The gloves I've
been using are not wind-proof enough. I even use them for snowboarding, but
cycling is surprisingly more demanding due to the wind.

[snow-cycling]: https://pxlfd.ca/i/web/post/792588034524958505

Speaking of snowboarding... wow I just love it. I love winter now. I've gone 7
times so far this season which is much more than I imagined. The learning curve
is steep, but every day on the mountain brings me a feeling beyond words. At the
very same bus stop where I arrive from work, I can hop on a bus and for $2.60 be
on the mountain in 45 minutes. A living dream.

Among other recent adventures with my partner Aline, we finally tried two things
that had been on our Vancouver bucket list for a while: a bike ride to Iona
Terminal and a seaplane flight to Victoria. Both were even better than I hoped
and we learned a lot from each experiment. Sharing these moments makes them all
the more colorful and memorable. It's my greatest luck.

We're watching Severance (great) and [Disclaimer][disc] (meh). Finished [Drops
of God][dog] (bad) a while ago, up next we have True North. I've been reading
[Paved Paradise][pp] (disheartening but good) and [Playing Possum][pps] (a bit
dry but super interesting). For music, Taylor Swift and Billie Eilish remain
dominating the rotation after their awesome concerts, and the next big event is
The Weekend.

[disc]: https://neodb.social/tv/season/6d3XZOiiiuuiHERDMSrBJh
[dog]: https://neodb.social/tv/6VZQXtGpHKPRLjsnLagZEb
[pp]: https://neodb.social/book/2tLqcslB6PRlvHLynRfP1t
[pps]: https://neodb.social/book/77foTxelPVvkedcPcgl1ZM

## Projects

This is more of a wishlist of things I'd like to be doing right now than a real
reflection of what I'm actually doing, but it all starts with an aspiration.
Writing these down also helps me to reflect: if these are the important things
to me, what's stopping me from working on them?

### SECRET

(for now, I need to coalesce my thoughts on what this means)

### Nine-to-Five Employment

I'm still working at AWS, with manageable levels of stress and off-hours work.
The biggest challenge has been the same in the past years: aligning work that is
interesting and _fun_ with work that brings impact and recognition. This got a
bit harder since I've started viying for a promotion to a Senior position, but
at the end of the day I still prioritize _doing cool stuff and doing it well_
even if a lot of it will end up invisible and delaying my career advancement.
It's an uncomfortable situation at times, but it's the best compromise I've
found in which I can taste the privilege of enjoying my craft while still
accepting the condition of having to do whatever the organization decides. At
the end of the day, it's an acceptable middle ground of having some cake and
eating it too. The one unresolved aspect is working for Amazon, but I trick
myself into not thinking about it too much - at least it's not Meta or Xitter,
and I'm not working on anything ethically dubious, it's mostly boring products
with scalability challenges.

### Federated Networks & This Website

I'm increasingly letting go of centralized social media, but I still want to be
in touch with loved ones and like-minded people, so I migrated my online
presence from Xitter/Instagram/Goodreads to their respective federated
alternatives: Mastodon/Pixelfed/NeoDB. Being realistic, though, I know that the
vast majority of the people in my life will not follow me there, so I'm also
looking into ways of broadcasting my activity in more ways than federation. I'm
currently experimenting with RSS, which will be a stepping stone towards a
newsletter.

I've owned my domain and this website since 2019, but it never really took off
because social media is a much easier path to interact with people. Now that the
situation with social media is reversing, this website is going to be the basis
for the RSS feed and possibly the newsletter, so I'm back to shaping it up. This
page is a big part of that.

In January 2025 I was able to get my Mastodon, Pixelfed and NeoDB activity
merged into a single [RSS feed](/feed.xml) (used to generate the [home
page](/)), which was much easier than I thought and renewed my belief in the
power of these open platforms.

Next steps: 1) Consolidate my writing on [this project's notes][indieweb] about
the fediverse and RSS 2) Investigate how to deliver newsletters with a curated
selection of my updates; 3) Automate a new type of activity: additions or
changes to my written material - like this page;

To read more: [my journey towards an independent web][indieweb].

[indieweb]: /notes/tech/www
