##### Web Sign-In

If you already [[Use a Custom Email Address]], a simple method is to use email
authentication supported by [[RelMeAuth]].

[[RelMeAuth]] might support one of the platforms or social networks you have an
account, but consider a bonus independence point not relying on those to
authenticate you anywhere.

Additionally, configuring [[IndieAuth]] with IndieAuth.com for authorization
will allow you to use your email-based [[RelMeAuth]] to sign in to websites that
don't support [[RelMeAuth]] directly but do support the [[IndieAuth]] standard.

Web Sign-In is an authentication method where the identity is based on a web
address. A client that supports Web Sign-In will then inspect the given address
to find an authorization method to use as next step.

One common implementation of Web Sign-In is RelMeAuth, which uses `rel=me` links
to find a service to which authentication can be delegated. Another option is
IndieAuth, where the client negotiates with a specified authorization endpoint.

IndieAuth is a protocol for [[Web Sign-In]]. It's a standard on top of [[OAuth]]
that defines how to obtain an OAuth 2.0 Bearer Token for an End-User represented
solely by an URL.

The protocol inspects your website for metadata that specifies which
authentication endpoint you want to use and then proceeds with the OAuth token
negotiation with that endpoint.

Supporting IndieAuth in a service means letting users bring their own
authentication provider. This provider can be a website like `micro.blog`, your
own OpenID proxy, or another [[Web Sign-In]] enabled provider like
`IndieAuth.com`.

To configure IndieAuth as a user, all you need to do is to inform the
authorization provider endpoint in your website. For example, when using
`IndieAuth.com`:

```
<link rel="authorization_endpoint" href="https://indieauth.com/auth">
```

> Using `rel="authorization_endpoint"` is deprecated on the IndieAuth spec but
> it's what IndieAuth.com supports at the moment.

The latest standard can be found at https://indieauth.spec.indieweb.org.

###### RelMeAuth

RelMeAuth is a protocol for Web Sign-In. This protocol inspects your website for
links to other identities of yours that could be used for authentication.

For example, these can be links to your profile on some platform like GitHub or
social media like Twitter. If the service confirms such profile belongs to the
same person that operates this website, the protocol knows that it can use this
service's authentication to confirm your identity.

RelMeAuth also supports different authentication delegates, including Email, SMS
and a Public (PGP) Key challenge.
