# Reclaiming the Web

The web is a cool place. We have many platforms, social networks, never-ending
content, independent websites; and most of it was built on technology intended
to be decentralized and democratic, which greatly contributed to the diversity
of services and organizations participating.

Alas, commit long enough to a booming ecosystem and it's inevitable to witness
frustrating limitations and wasted potential. It's possible to share a Goodreads
book review on social media, but comments/replies there won't be visible in the
original post. Facebook's algorithmic feed penalizes links to external websites.
Instagram outright disallowed links in posts. Twitter closed off its API.
Spotify tried podcast exclusives. Each service welcomes more content but is
resistant to letting users get it elsewhere.

That's because recent developments on the web haven't always followed the same
principles of openness and user empowerment. Corporations behind big platforms
are financially incentivized to silo themselves, cut off the competition and
constrain the users who supposedly own the content they produce. Hoarding and
monopolizing data is how these companies are able to grow engagement for their
ads and services businesses, so strong regulation is generally the only reason
why a silo would open up.

But policymaking is slow and overloaded with tough decisions, having to react to
an ever changing technology landscape and fight against the interests of the
biggest corporations in the world. Fortunately there's no need to wait. The
independent web is a grassroots movement to nudge the web back into a more
decentralized but interconnected place.

[Read more...](https://indieweb.org/why)

## Owning a Domain Name

Having an personal Internet Domain Name is the first step towards taking
ownership of one's online identity and taking control over an own corner of the
Web. Because the domain serves as bedrock to that identity, it should be chosen
carefully and considered permanent as much as possible. A domain costs money,
but a cheap one costs less than a telephone landline.

There are a few tools like [CunningBot][] that can help choosing a domain name
and others like [Instant Domain Search][] that can quickly search under which
[TLD][]s a name is available. There are also tools like [Namechk][] that probe
if common platforms and social networks will have that name as an available
handles, which is nice for consistency.

[CunningBot]: https://cunningbot.com
[Instant Domain Search]: https://instantdomainsearch.com/
[TLD]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Top-level_domain
[Namechk]: https://namechk.com

## Custom Email Address

If a purchasing a domain name is like buying a virtual plot of land, configuring
an email would be the equivalent of installing a mail box able to receive the
usual proofs of residency.

Most e-mail providers support adding a custom email address to an existing
account, requiring minimal work to start using the new address and keeping all
the old mail. If the current provider doesn't support it, it's likely the Domain
Registrar that sells the domain also offers an inbox or forwarding service.

Having all e-mail coming through an own address allows changing providers in the
future without having to change email address, thus avoiding the hassle of
notifying contacts and updating sign-ups everywhere. Just point the address to a
different mailbox and start receiving new mail there. This freedom reduces
lock-in to specific platforms and is a simple yet effective way to diminish
corporations' hold on the ecosystem.

## A Personal Website

Owning a domain and being reachable through it (e.g. with a custom email) is the
foundation for an independent presence on the Web, but the biggest potential
lies in using that property to build up a haven for what matters. That's
possible going back to the open technologies behind the success of the Internet:
the web.

Static website hosting is cheap - often free - and powerful enough for the vast
majority of use cases.
