# Flexible Vegetarianism

A flexitarian (flexible vegetarian) diet is centered on plant foods with limited
or occasional inclusion of dairy and meat. It plays along with other dietary
"philosophies", such as ethical omnivorism, as an incrementalist approach to
reducing the hazards and negative externalities of feeding oneself.

Meat and dairy are tasty, I know. Trust me, **I know**. What some may call
'barbecue' is but junk food compared to a traditional south-american
_churrasco/asado_ - no steak house will ever replicate it. And cheese? I don't
believe humanity will ever produce a passable plant-based _canastra_ cheese.
_Moqueca_, bobó, vatapá... lating american seafood is irreplaceable in my heart.

While meat is indeed tasty, [it is a champion of negative externalities in this
world - land use, water use, greenhouse gas emissions, animal suffering
etc][kg-meat]. Seafood and dairy each have their own unique issues too. 

[kg-meat]: https://youtu.be/NxvQPzrg2Wg?si=s6P64WtE28ynSUlW

Certain aspects of consumption can be offset a little with some investment.
Free-range eggs, sustainably produced/harvested seafood, organic/grass-fed cow
milk etc are better defaults. But improvements regarding animal cruelty usually
also mean a worse environmental impact because factory farming is so efficient.

In terms of health, it is possible to have a healthy diet with plenty of animal
products. It's also pretty easy to have an unhealthy plant-based diet. That's
why I tend to keep "health" as a concern separate from my vegetarianism. Health
is an elusive concept anyway, though there is a health benefit intrinsic to
being more intentional with meal planning and paying more attention to our
diets.

My average month of meals breaks down approximately into: 20/60 include dairy or
eggs, 10/60 have seafood, 5/60 will include meat. Dairy means mostly cheese, as
in general our household replaced milk with oat milk except for lattes and
desserts. In the eyes of my "carnivore" friends, I'm basically an
ovo-lacto-pescatarian that can be tempted into eating meat once a week.

Fully fledged vegans might scoff at such a low bar, but compared to my young
adult diet where nearly all of my meals would include some meat and dairy, I'm
down on meat consumption by about 90% and overall animal products consumption by
two thirds.

Of course, there's more always I could be doing, but while I'm still having an
amazing time with my meals, I've already reduced the amount of agricultural land
necessary to sustain my lifestyle by about 50%.

That's a lot of impact for such an unambitious change of habit.