# ðŸš¥ Towards Zero Traffic Deaths

When I moved from Rio de Janeiro to SÃ£o Paulo, one of the biggest improvements
on my quality of life was becoming car-free. I still used a car here and there,
to visit in-laws or traveling to the country, but swapping out driving and
maintaining a car to a mix of subway and cycling day-to-day was game changing.
That's not the norm in SÃ£o Paulo, but it was a privilege I obtained that became
a key factor in enjoying the city.

Fast forward a few years; the new urbanist movement around 15-minute cities
growing stronger; climate crisis ever looming and active transportation policy
becoming more widely sought-after; I move to Vancouver. If my overall experience
as city dweller improved in almost every axis after moving to SÃ£o Paulo except
perhaps for "beach time", the same gains repeat tenfold here plus getting
beaches back - on summers at least.

Like any big city, Vancouver is a complex amalgamation of forward and backward
policies, culture and infrastructure. On the one hand, I'm as confident as ever
that I can live a complete urban life without owning a car due to the decent
amount of cycling infrastructure around [MetroCore][], plus the amount of
public-transit-accessible adventures - from turquoise lake hikes to snowboarding
mountaintops. On the other hand, progress is sometimes slow, sometimes
non-existent, as waves of car-centrism ebb and flow more or less in synchrony
with conservatism majorities on the wheels of the public sphere.

[MetroCore]: https://thedva.ca/defining-vancouvers-metrocore/

Rio, SÃ£o Paulo, and Vancouver can and should and do more to make car dependency
a thing of the past, so becoming car-free becomes not a privilege of the few,
but a feasible choice for anyone. Owning a car should be a matter of personal
preference as much as its color, not a condition for getting access to work or
leisure.

## Getting Involved

The biggest barrier to more people cycling on big cities has always been safety.
This is for good reason: in Vancouver as of 2023, about 100 people die in
traffic every year while trying to get from point A to point B. It's no wonder
people wish to have as much metal around them as possible while on the road, but
unfortunately that also creates a negative feedback loop where more/bigger SUVs
make it even less safe for everyone else - specially for those on any other less
protected transportation device: bicycles, skateboards, rollers, or just walking
on two legs.

That's where Vision Zero comes in. Conceptually, it's [a multi-national effort
to zero out traffic related fatalities, started in Sweden in 1997][vz]. It's
recognized officially as a [provincial level program in British Columbia][bc-vz]
as well as a [municipal one in Vancouver][cov-vz]. Most importantly, it's also a
program that local advocacy groups can do serious work, like the [Vision Zero
Vancouver][vzv] which aims to put some momentum towards Vision Zero for the
metro region.

[vz]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vision_Zero
[bc-vz]: https://www.visionzerobc.ca
[cov-vz]: https://vancouver.ca/streets-transportation/transportation-safety.aspx
[vzv]: https://visionzerovancouver.ca

### Average Crash Counts Sheet

[Data][].

[Data]: https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/icbc/viz/LowerMainlandCrashes/LMDashboard

[Sheet][].

[Sheet]: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1SfDWFnNJ8LMxAu23wIKsCXdV_tzdYV_GczR5nSh4l2E

### Crash Count iOS Shortcut

[Shortcut][].

[Shortcut]: https://routinehub.co/shortcut/17369/
