# Pour Over & Filter

### Bloom

The main goal of the bloom is to degass (remove CO2) from the coffee
grounds. CO2 insulate solubles and also create channeling - which gets
in the way of uniform diffusion -, so degassing with as little water as
possible contributes to the overall quality of extraction.

\

### Dialing In

\

**Strength vs Yield**

The \[\[Brewing Control Chart\]\] for Pour Overs is:

\

\![\|600\](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0219906.g001&type=large)

(Source:[ 
]{.Apple-converted-space}https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0219906)

\

# Recipes

### Matt Winton\'s Five Pour \~ James Hoffman\'s Single Cup V60

A simple 5-pour recipe for medium-coarse grinds that makes use of high
agitation. Popularized by Matt Winston
(\[MW1\](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YIC-2nFQ7vM),
\[MW2\](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xm2aAuhuLks)) and recommended
for single-cup brews by James Hoffman
(\[JH\](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1oB1oDrDkHM)).

\

\- Aimed at 15g dose, works well in the 10\~20g range

\- Preferred ratio of 60g/L but 1:15 \~ 1:17 range

\- 100 C for light roasts, down to 90C for darker ones

\- Medium-fine grind, aiming at a 3m total drawdown

\

1\. Bloom with 20% of total water, swirl and rest until 0:50

2\. Pour up to 40% total, rest until 1:10 or until dripping slows down

3\. Pour up to 60% total, rest until 1:30 or until dripping slows down

4\. Pour up to 80% total, rest until 1:50 or until dripping slows down

5\. Pour the remaining water and swirl

\

### James Hoffman\'s Ultimate V60

1\. Bloom with 2-3 x dose (30 to 45 seconds rest)

2\. Swirl during bloom as well

3\. Pour 60% of total target in 30 seconds. That\'s enough to give it a
good agitation but not too much.

4\. Pour the rest in the next 30 seconds.

5\. Stir with a spoon a bit for both sides.

6\. Allow the water to drawdown a bit and give it a good swirl.

\

### Lance Hedrick\'s Catch-All Recipe

A recipe easy to replicate because it\'s designed for the average
specialty coffee instead of dainty beans used in competitions, pushing
extraction high under the assumption of an endgame grinder. Instead, the
goal of this recipe is to be easy to dial in by small teaks to ratio and
temperature - grind size adjusted just for flow rate, not taste.

\

\- Up to 30g of coffee

\- Medium grind size

\- Ratio of 1:17 for lightest roasts, 1:14 for darkest roasts

\- Water at 100 C for lightest roasts, 85 C for darkest roasts

\

1\. 3x mass of coffee for bloom

2\. Agitate (can excavate or Wet WDT)

3\. Wait 1-2 minutes

4\. Pour rest of water at 6-8g/s with optimal height for deep turbulence

5\. Just swirl if draining slowly OR Wet WDT if somewhat quick OR turn
bed over with spoon if draining quickly

6\. Total time: 2-3 min IF 1min bloom time 3-4min IF 2 min bloom time

\

### Lance Hedrick\'s Vibrant V60

A recipe that prioritizes vibrancy and fruity notes instead of clarity
and high extractions. According to
\[Lance\](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rAdgJNK0csc), it\'s also
forgiving of conical burrs because it aims to capture fines on the sides
of the filter through controlled agitation.

\

\- Boiling water

\- 1:17 ratio (e.g. 18 g coffee, 306 g of water)

\- Grind size of 5.5 on the K-Plus

\- Rinse filter with strong tap stream to minimize air pockets

\- Loose divot in the center

\

1\. Bloom with 3x dose doing a spiral from higher up (2 minutes rest)

2\. Swirl aggressively ensuring no clumps on the walls

3\. Pour doing a spiral from higher up up to 1/3 of the total brew

4\. Pour the remaining 2/3 in a spiral down closer

5\. Gently stir the upper layer of the liquid until it finishes draining

\

The [**喫茶店**]{.s1}

V60 Dome

An unnamed and very pretty technique traditional in Japanese coffee
shops, divulged by \[Brewing
Habits\](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kqQDYf8BmIA). Sometimes called
Osmotic Flow by \[CAFEC\](https://cafec-jp.com/brewing-guide/)\'s
marketing, though the science justifying that name is controversial.

\

\- Minimum 18 g coffee dose, darker roasts preferred

\- 1:13 to 1:16 ratio, traditionally closer to 1:13

\- 80-85 °C water is enough for such high dose and darker roast

\- Minimize stirring by pouring very slowly and very close (about 1 cm
high)

\- Grind size about a bit coarser than a normal V60 grind to speed up
flow

\- Rinse/pre-heat filter & shake coffee grinds flat beforehand

\

1\. Bloom with 2-3 x dose in slow spirals (10-30 seconds rest)

2\. Pour at the center \*\*up to\*\* 1/3 of the total brew (let it drain
for 5 seconds)

3\. Pour the remaining 2/3 in a slow spiral up to a \~2.5 cm diameter

4\. Let it drain only for 5 seconds, then remove brewer

\

\

---

\

### Bypass

It\'s when water goes around the beans, instead of through. The higher
the water level relative to the coffee bed, the more bypass in a regular
filter.

\

**No-Bypass Filters**

It\'s a concept around pour-over coffee.

\

Some of the water goes side-ways in the filter and around the coffee.

That water is called bypass water.

\

The more water goes through coffee, the more solubles down the cup.

Less bypass means more effective and efficient extraction.

A stronger extraction.

\

Aeropress is zero-bypass, espresso as well.

But water doesn\'t want to go through coffee, it takes pressure.

\

Models:

Tricolate

Next Level
