# Species & Varieties

Coffee Beans come from cherries which grow on the coffee plant.

There are two main plant species of coffee used for consumption: Arabica
(*\_Coffea arabica\_*) and Canephora (*\_Coffea canephora\_*). The
Canephora species has a most famous variety named Robusta, commonly used
as metonym for the species. Robusta is also known as Conilon in Brazil.

The Canephora species is considered to be an ancestor to the Arabica
species, but there\'s also evidence that the better flavor from Arabica
was inherited from the Eugenioides species (*\_Coffea eugenioides\_*).
It is believed that a single \"interbreeding\" event between Canephora
and Eugenioides created the common ancestor of all existing Arabica
coffee. Eugenioides is a wilder species and much harder to cultivate so
it\'s not widely available.

There\'s also a species known as Liberian (*\_Coffea liberica\_*) which
accounts for less than 2% the worldwide production, plus other species
not significantly commercialized like the Racemosa (*\_Coffea
racemosa\_*), a low-caffeine species, and the Charrier (*\_Coffea
charrieriana\_*), completely caffeine-free, among others.

There are \[dozens of Arabica
varieties\](https://varieties.worldcoffeeresearch.org/varieties).
A few notable ones are the Typica (considered the first and grown
extensively around the world), Bourbon (mutation of Typica with
distinctive sweetness), Caturra (mutation of Bourbon that is high yield
and low growing), Mundo Novo (hybrid of Typica and Bourbon with strength
and disease resistance), Catua√≠ (hybrid of
Caturra and Mundo Novo combining low growing and strength), Geisha
(exceptionally floral aromatics).

Robusta is already a variety of Canephora, but there are a few others
notable ones like Nganda and Sulu. Liberian has a famous Barako variety.
These varieties arise from local selection and help indicating the beans
origin and characteristics.

Arabica represents around 60% of production and is regarded as the
higher quality beans due to extracting with more sweetness and less
bitterness. Canephora, on the other hand, contains much more caffeine
and is less susceptible to pests and diseases so cultivation tends to
employ less pesticides. Liberian has the lowest amount of caffeine among
the top three and is the most expensive mostly because there\'s so
little produced of it.

All of the hundreds of commercially available \[\[Grape Varieties\]\]
for wine come from a single species, so there\'s still room for a many
more new coffee varieties to emerge.
