# Roasting

Roasting is the final processing step before the \[\[Species and
Varieties\]\] can be finally consumed, after \[\[Coffee Fruit
Processing\]\]. It plays a major role on the final flavor profile of the
\[\[Coffee Extract\]\], as though beans will naturally have their
different characteristics, their chemical composition is dramatically
affected by the roasting process (pyrolysis).

For example, roasting affects the solubility of carbohydrates. Increased
degrees of roasting increase the solubility of galactomannans, but too
much roasting leads to degradation of arabinogalactans. These two are
the main polysaccharides present in a coffee brew and are theorized to
define the brew \[\[Sweetness\]\]. Sugar compounds like sucrose don\'t
survive even the lightest roasts.

More roasting also means less acidity.

Too little roasting means less aroma because the gas is not created, so
less aroma.

Too much roasting rips the cellulose containing the formed gases and
these are lost, so less aroma.

Same thing with body. Too little roasting, little body. Too much
roasting, little body.

Too much roasting pretty much destroys everything and leaves only
bitterness.

#TODO Maillard reaction/components

#TODO
https://associatedcoffee.com/blog/how-coffee-changes-during-the-roasting-process/

#TODO https://codeblackcoffee.com.au/blogs/coffee-notes/coffee-module-1

However, the darker the roast doesn't mean the better the brew as this
is a common misconception. The beans should be roasted to a point where
the preferred flavor profiles are highlighted and this generally happens
between in a light to medium roast.

Pitch-black coffee roasted is usually an indicative of low-quality
beans, as the roasting process had no intent of preserving flavor.

### \## Window

### \## Freshness

The life expectancy of roasted coffee can be anywhere from 2 weeks to 2
months from the roast date, after which the beans starts to go stale and
there\'s noticeable deterioration in quality, usually in the form of
sour, dull/flat flavors.

The expectancy varies across roast profile and storage (oxygen, light,
moisture, extreme temperature). Darker roasts release CO2 faster and
stale quicker due to the weakening of the beans cellulose structures.
Oxygen and light cause oxidation, while moisture might react with the
grounds and extreme temperatures will break down important components.
